From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists. Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number two 31 recorded live
Thursday, September 2nd, 2010. Support for Hanselman
it's just provided by Tellerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Eric sink from
source gear about DVCS. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman, and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes. And today we're
chatting with Eric sink, a
founder at source gear who
makes source control products. And
I want to talk to
Eric because I figured he
could explain distributed revision control
or DVCS distributed version control
systems. To me, how's it
going, Eric, come on in
Scott going well, how are
you? How's your bed? I,
I started using version control
systems and I want to
say 91 or 92. Wow.
That is like 20 years
ago almost. And I use
my first one. My introduction
to that was, was source
safe. And I spent a
lot of time in sourcing.
Do you think people are
still using it now? Oh,
definitely. We, we hear a
lot of people using source
safe. In fact, you know,
we still sell an add
on product for source safe
and it still sells fairly
well after 10 years. So
there's definitely a lot of
sort of safe users out
there. What is it that
people hate about source safe
and why do so many
people use it? Well, I
mean, what they hate about
source safe is just its
reputation. You know, I we've
done our share of bashing
source if I'd have to
say, but you know, the
fairest way to say it
is that especially, it probably
doesn't deserve as much bashing
as it gets. It. It
had some reliability problems in
the past. My understanding is
those are mostly worked out.
And so, you know, what
we need to talk about
is what they love about
source they have. And that
is what they loved back
in 92. And that is
it's really easy to use.
And people are still in
love with that kind of
ease of use. It seems
like some people have said
that sort of safe is
really no more useful than
just zipping up your source.
Like I know a lot
of people, unfortunately, who still
do that, like source control
to them is a zip
file. Like one dot, zip,
zip. Yeah. Yeah. Certainly. I
mean, we've all done that
I don't, I mean, I
think to say that source
safe is no more useful
than that is, is pretty
unfair. I mean, I think
it's fair to say that
SourceSafe has not stayed modern
as version control has evolved
over the years, but it
was a groundbreaking product when
it was released. And the
fact that it is still
widely used almost 20 years
later is really a Testament
to what a great product
it has been seriously. I
do. I don't think it's
just cause it's sticky. I
mean, the people are just
using it because of momentum
and inertia. Well, I think,
I mean, I think it's
free. I mean, basically it's
very windows friendly, you know,
it is still has a
lot going for it, even
though, you know, I don't
think you're going to see
a lot of your so
called alpha hackers using source
save these days, but there's
a lot of programmers out
there, all kinds of shapes
and sizes and SourceSafe is
sort of save is still
pretty popular. Do we want
to get those other, those
people off of this? I
said, I know Microsoft does.
And I know two of
them, Mike, Microsoft decide do
we, as, as, as programmers
that are slightly above average,
want to help the average
and below average programmers get
off of this thing? Is
it, is it a bad
thing or is it better
than nothing? I, I don't
know. See, some people would
say it's worse than nothing,
but that may just be
bashing. I think it's just
bashing. I mean, if you're
a modern source safe user
using the latest releases, I
don't think it's that bad
of a tool. I certainly
don't think it's something, you
know, that we have to
rescue them, although it's, This
is totally not the way
I thought this was going
to go. Well, the fact
is, I mean, I answer,
I give the opposite answer
sometimes because I have a
business incentive to sell people,
our SourceSafe replacement and I
like to sell that. That's
great. But the, the fact
is every time we go
to a trade show, somebody
comes up to us and
asks us, so why should
I get off source safe?
And I asked them the
question, are you happy with
source safe? And they say,
yes, I am. I said,
then don't get off mean
isn't it. So this conversation
over and over now, the
vast majority of people that
turns out are not happy
with SourceSafe. And for those
people, we have a solution.
We hope fits them, but
we're not trying to force
people into a change that
they don't have any reason
to make. Hmm. That's extremely,
that's extremely pragmatic. Wouldn't wouldn't
couldn't you argue that by
switching over to something like
subversion, which wouldn't be too
big of a jump that
they, they would gain so
much more and they would
have a product that was
changing and, and being improved
on a regular basis. I
could definitely argue that, but
I mean, there's a couple
of things to that. I
always keep in mind. One
is that psychologists will tell
you that people don't change
unless the status quo becomes
intolerable. And I think that's,
that's even more for version
control users. People are just
really resistant to change the
version control tool, and we're
not likely to succeed in
business. If our, if our
business model is to convince
people that they're unhappy. I
mean, salespeople will have this
thing. They call create dissatisfaction
with the status quo. I'm
not a sales weasel, you
know, I'm primarily just trying
to be pragmatic. Like you
said, there are enough unhappy
people for us to make
money. There's no reason trying
to take happy people and
turn them into unhappy people
just so that we can
make money. Okay. But what
about kind of the larger
philosophical stuff like the, you
know, save their souls or
their souls in danger? Oh,
I don't know if I'd
say their souls in danger
there, you know, the, the
fact is there are better
alternatives out there and you
know, sometimes people are happy
because they don't know what
they're missing. And there's, you
know, there is another side
of this coin and that
is that you show people
what they're missing and all
of a sudden they start
to become unhappy and they
think about a change. And
there are some, there are
some tools out there that
are a major step forward.
I mean, source safe is
largely what it is in
93. You know, this thing
has not changed a lot,
certainly in the last 15
years. And the fact that
it still meets anyone's needs
is amazing. How many pieces
of software do you know
that are 15 years old?
But that doesn't mean it's
modern. That doesn't mean it
has kept pace. And certainly
there are alternatives out there
that people should explore if
they're interested in new things.
Okay. So, so one of
the things that people that
I didn't like and people
don't like about source source
safe out of the box
is the idea that when
I checked something out, it's
checked out only to me
exclusive checkouts. And while there
are settings within source safe
to say that you don't
really want to lock a
file when you check it
out, most people don't change
that. And when they do
the merging process is so
painful that they get in
trouble. And I have been
at two different companies where
we have moved from SourceSafe
to either CVS or subversion
and found some version to
be absolutely lovely and wonderful
in the tortoise. SVN is
great and everything was peachy
keen until we actually did
merges. And then things got
a little crazy. And then
we tried to go and
impose a, you know, the
whole standard trunks and branches
style of a folder, a
layout, and then things got
a little bit better. Could
you talk a little bit
about some of the strengths
of CVS and subversion and,
and how that is, or
is not an improvement over
sourcing? Well, I mean, certainly
you've hit some of them
there already. Subversion is a
heck of a tool. It's
the, the truth that despite
everything we just said is
sort of safe users are
leaving source safe at a
regular basis. And a lot
of them are going to
our product. A lot of
them are going to TFS,
but a whole lot of
them are going to subversion
and for good reason, because
it's free, it's constantly being
maintained and improved, it's reliable.
And once they, once they
kind of get over the
lack of exclusive locks on
a file, it, everyone who
makes that choice, who makes
that change is happier when
they're done. There's a certain
fear to it for people
who have always sort of
lived with the assumption that
when I have a file
checked out, I'm the only
one that can modify it.
And there's a safety in
that, that it's hard to
get people out of, but
once they do make the
change, everyone, I know who's
made the change is happy
once they've done it. But
even the ones that dreaded
the change before they did
it. And CVS versus subversion,
I mean, CVS was what
we, we switched over to
at the time and then
kind of subversion was, was
on the rise. And then
we actually went from, we
switched from SourceSafe to CVS
and then said, well, you
know, things are getting corrupted
and things are difficult and
things are tricky and we'll
just switch over to servers.
So we kind of did
like a little hop between
the two. That seems to
be a very common thing,
but now CVS is largely
forgotten. Yeah. Less and less
common all the time. I
mean, there's very little reason
to start using CVS today.
If you, if you're looking
for a new version control
in that realm, then subversion
is, is almost certainly the
way to go. I talked
to, I talked to some
folks once at a, at
a bank who, you know,
I, I like to ask
people what source control tool
they use. And they said,
well, we'll use CVS. And
I said, good grief. Why
don't you switch to subversion?
I mean, it's time. And
they said, well, we're not
allowed to switch to subversion
because there's a policy against
open source. And I said,
you know, CVS is open
source. And they said, yes,
but our bosses don't know
that. So aside from the
crazy reasons, there's really no
reason to use CVS today.
So version sustaining, I have
worked at that company, whatever
that is, we've opened up
snuck open source in the
companies because it was well
known and they knew the
names. So they assumed there
was a company behind it.
Right. That's awesome. So then
what is distributed version control?
So distributed version control is,
is this new, relatively new
thing. And, you know, saying
that, it's saying that it's
new, I suppose, is a
little bit insulting to the
folks that have been doing
it since 1997. But the
fact is it's, it's relatively
new because it's, you know,
it's only recently starting to
approach mainstream. And the basic
idea is that instead of
one central server, the version
control tool in most cases
will operate where every user
has their own copy of
the whole repository, the, the
sort of high level way
of explaining it is that
it brings a tremendous amount
of flexibility. And by and
large, the DVCS community has,
has done a horrible job
of explaining its benefits. Because
usually when you ask somebody
what a DVCS is, they
will say something like, Oh,
well, there's no central server.
Well, who wants that? I
mean, everyone wants a central
server. In fact, the, the
reality is that that one
of the big benefits of
DVCS is that instead of
one central server, you might
want two or three for
all kinds of reasons, because
of the flexibility. The other
thing that people say is
that you can code on
an airplane and no one
codes on airplanes. That was
exactly what people said. We
didn't call it in an
airplane. That's not great. You
know what you want to
do all of your good
work on an airplane and
then check it in from
the lounge. Yeah. I mean,
the idea is sort of
ludicrous. And as I, you
know, one of the jokes
I throw around is that,
well, the airplanes have wifi
now, anyway. So, but the
really, it just comes down
to flexibility. And after 10
years of supporting different source
control products, one thing I
know is that customers always
want flexibility. They always end
up wanting some kind of
flexibility that you don't have.
And so, you know, if
we, if we go to
most of our customers today
and say, Hey, we're going
to offer you a product
that has no central server,
they're going to freak out.
But some of those same
customers have called us and
said things like, yeah, so
I've got this team in
Phoenix and I got a
team in Denver and I
don't want to have to
use the same server for
both of them. I want
to each of them to
have their own server and
sync it up at night.
Can I do that? And
that's the kind of things
that DVCS does because of
the flexibility, but it, it,
it needs to be explained
in terms of the kinds
of problems that customers really
have. This is the part
of the show where I
mock you while actually Tellerik
mock says your applications, that
you're testing dependent on external
systems over which you have
no control. Maybe you're being
slowed down by those systems,
their lack of availability, responsiveness.
Do you want to do
TDD? Right? Our friends at
Tellerik help you solve some
of those problems with their
newest marketing tool, just mock
it'll let you do fast,
simple controlled unit tests, independent
of external resources, like databases,
web services, proprietary code, unlike
some marketing tools, just mock
works with non-virtual methods, seal
classes, static methods, giving you
complete control of your code.
You can get more details.
You can download just mock
at telerik.com/just Mark. And don't
forget to thank Tellerik for
supporting Hanselman it's on their
Facebook fan page, facebook.com/tellerik. Thanks
a lot. So what is
the balance then between having
a central server and still
being distributed? The is usually,
I mean, in terms of
a DVCS it's your central
server is the central server
because of policy. You're not
in contact with it all
the time, but every team
I know that uses a
DVCS has at least one
central server. And the, I
guess I'd say the balance
is that you have the
central server for the things
you want it for, but
you don't have to have
it every second. You do
have the ability to have
offline operation, which, you know,
is still important, even if
you're not talking about airplanes,
because I mean, the fact
is people are mobile these
days and you know, for
a lot of people, I
know certainly for me, wifi
is a lot like a
cop. I mean, it seems
like there's always a cop
around when you don't need
one. And, and when you
do, you can't find one,
well, wifi is the same
way everywhere I go. There's
signs saying free wifi. And
about a third of the
time when I really need
wifi, I don't have it.
And so, I mean, offline
operation is still, is still
a valuable use case, but
that doesn't mean we don't,
we don't want a central
server. I mean, we all
want a place where the
team pushes their work. And,
and so everyone I know,
uses a DVCS that way.
And in fact, some of
them have two central servers
they'll have, okay, push your
work to here. If it's,
if it passes the test
suite and then they'll have
another central server that says,
push it here. If it
doesn't pass the test suite,
but you want it backed
up. So we got two
central places to put it.
Okay. But, but the, the
main, like the lead in
the chief programmer model, their
computer is never the authoritative
source, is it? That's right.
It's their computer is not
the authoritative source. It's a,
it's a copy of the,
of the repo that is
only as up to date,
as you know, as it
is synchronized with the central
server. Right. Right. But it
would be fair to say,
like with like, like Linus,
his computer is not the
authoritative source of the kernels.
Some central repository is, That's
probably true. I don't actually
know how Linus does that.
Well, you know, he uses
get, of course, and he,
he's the kind of the
primary committer. So people send
him requests, pull requests and
say, here's a, here's a
fix, go check it out.
Right. The real answer is
that the thing that is
the central is the authoritative
source is the one you
decided you want it to
be, rather than having the
software constrain you and say,
all your changes have to
be here for them to
be authoritative. It's simply a
matter of you decide whether
you does making the decision
or having the software, make
the decision is the way
to say it. Say that
again. Yeah. Because I didn't
say well, no, but That's,
it's, it's, it's, it's either
incredibly deep or it makes
no sense at all. So
I want you to say
it again so I can
find out what it is.
Fair enough. The difference is
whether the software is making
a decision about where, what
the authoritative repo for the
code is, or whether a
human being is making the
decision. Right. Right. And no
matter what the software says,
you can just decide that
the authoritative source is your
machine. If you'd like, and,
and that's where you, you
know, God forbid, that's where
you do your builds and
your releases from that. I
guess it is the authoritative.
Sorry. Right. And if you
want to decide that, that
way you're free to the,
I mean, this is a
little bit of a two
edged sword. I go back
to what I started with
here and say that the
great thing about DVCS is
our flexibility. And the bad
thing about flexibility is that
it allows people to do
stupid things. It's a little
bit like C you know,
see, you can do anything,
but it's also one of
the best languages for shooting
yourself in the foot. We
have the same design pattern,
all across technology, things that
offer more flexibility, give the
user the power to do
stupid things. People, you know,
things that have really constrained
user interfaces, like an iPod.
You don't have a lot
of power to do stupid
things, but they work really,
really well. How do people
initially find it so difficult
to jump from something like
subversion or source safe or
in source gear to a
distributed version control system? What
is the, the, the disconnect
that makes that leap difficult?
I certainly think the, I
mean, one of the first
disconnects is, is a little
bit what we've been talking
about, where they don't see
why they still want their
central server. And the tool
is being explained to them
in a way that says
they don't need one. You
know, that's one of the
first disconnects, the it's also
the flexibility comes a little
bit of a price. So
another big disconnect is this
idea that branching you're either
afraid of it, or you're
not source control tools that
do allow easy job at
branching and merging train people
to be afraid of branching
and merging. The fact is
the DVCS tools, branching and
merging is extremely common. So
the tools end up being
really good at it. And
that disconnect can be The
big issue as well. Now
that's, that's significant. There are
things that may or may
not be possible in the
core engine of a source
control system, but depending on
the way that they are
presented through the tooling, you
can basically make people afraid
of the concept by the
tool sucking enough. And I
definitely can say I was
a branching emerging PR. I
was, I was afraid of
those, those concepts and people
who are saying yes, and
the DVCS world is just
so it's wonderful. It's just,
you know, it's puppies and
unicorns it's to believe that.
So I would say even
my, my own kind of
disbelief that it could be
that easy is a, is
enough to prevent me from
leaping over that chasm. And
to an extent you're right.
Everyone's saying that it's, you
know, it's just wonderful joy
doing branching and merging in
the DVCS world. I think
that overstating it a bit.
It's better. It's definitely better,
but you don't want to,
it's still something to be
avoided. I mean, I just
did well. Yeah. I'm working
as a programmer on our
team and I had a
five week private branch where
I was actively coding for
five weeks and the rest
of the team was actively
coding for five weeks and
I had to do a
merge and it worked out
pretty well, but it still
wasn't fun. I mean, merging,
merging can be a pain
and DVCS has made it
better, but they're, they're not
a panacea for that. What
are some of the DVCS
is that people would, would
look at? I mean, I
think we know some of
the source control systems that
are more, more standard, more
centralized version control systems, but
we hear about get, we
hear about material. You have,
you have a product as
well. Yeah, we are. We
are working on a new
offering. Certainly ours is not
ready yet, but certainly the
two most popular ones today
would be, would be get
and were curial. And for
a little bit more windows
friendly audience, like, like this
one, you know, mercurial is
probably the most popular choice
and it's, it's outstanding. We
use mercurial for our own
development until we could dog
food, which means, you know,
we were using it for
quite a while and, and
finding it to be a
good product. Why is mercurial,
if people keep saying mercurial
is more friendly, why is
that? It's just because it
integrates with there's an integration
point for Explorer. Well, it's
that, but I mean, the
same thing exists to some
extent, forget mercurial was definitely
designed for ease of use.
I mean, I guess I'll
give two answers. One is
the ease of use aspect.
And the big issue there
is that get, has one
extra abstraction that it calls
the index. So it's not
only an extra abstraction, but
it's a poorly named abstraction.
And that is that everything
in get goes into this
staging area and then it
gets committed. And so it's,
it's actually sort of an
extra step. And conceptually, it's
just one more abstraction for
people to wrap their head
around. And the, and the
result is that it creates
the impression of being a
little harder to use mercurial
doesn't have that its command
set is much more similar
to subversion, except for the
fact that it's a DVCS
of course, and most people
just find it to be
a lot friendlier. The second
big thing, especially for windows
users is that get, was
originally written only for Linux
it's it's from a little
bit of, you know, Linux
centricity ever since. It's never,
it's nowhere close to as
cool and fast on windows
as it is on Linux.
Whereas mercurial is, is much
more cross platform in that
regard. Why should someone pick
one? I mean, should you
just try them both and
see what you like, or
should you, should you simply
make the decision based on
materials slightly more friendly on
windows? Like what kind of
things did you think about
when you are out there
thinking it's time for us
to move towards distributed version
control? What are some of
the decision points? Probably? Well,
like I said, windows friendliness
is, is one decision point.
I mean, people come in
two kinds when they're making
decisions like that, they either
trust the advice of an
expert or they want to
go explore every single issue
and decide what to do.
And I'm currently looking to
buy a new truck and
I explored every single issue.
I don't want to just
tell, I have somebody tell
me, get a Ford or
a Chevy. And you know,
the same thing happens if
you want to trust the
advice of an expert. Yeah.
I'd say, go with, Procurian
try it first. But if
you want to explore every
single issue, you'll find out
that, you know, some of
the decision points are, if
you work primarily on windows,
gate is gonna frustrate you.
If you are interested in
the absolute fastest product, get
is the way to go
mercurial. It depends on the
version that you're using. Say
on windows, they're going to
be competitive. Certainly if you're
on, if you're on Linux
and performance is, you know,
primary for you, you know,
get as the way to
go. You know, you should
know whether you're a power
user or not. I mean,
get, has hundreds of commands.
It's like a Swiss army
knife. It lets you do
anything you want to do.
Mercurial is, is relatively simple
in that regard. Oh, another
big one is, and I
don't know if this is
too far, too much detail
for the show, but yeah.
Mercurial have different philosophies about
pushing change sets to the
server. Get we'll let you
do things that could be
thought of as rewriting history.
What, you know, what Linux
wants his lieutenants to do
when they push things to
his repo is don't show
me all the intervening changes
that you made. What I
want you to do is
take all your changes, squash
them up into one change,
set with one good explanatory
comment and push me that
it's simpler. I want things
clean. Well, in a sense,
if you only push that
to the central repo, you
lost all your intervening steps
and those steps are in
fact part of the history
of the change. And so
there's this huge philosophical divide
between the, the culture of
the get community and the,
of the mercurial community. And
if you dive in to
look for decision points, you
will find that divide and
you will find yourself siding
with one side of the
other. Is it a war?
I don't know if I'd
say it's a war a
little bit. Maybe I haven't
seen any actual blood, but
it's, it's definitely a disagreement.
Do you think that windows
people focus too much on
wishing there was a tortoise
version of whatever the version
control system that they wanted.
Did they Listening is a,
is that as a plugin
to explore a tortoise, CVS
was one Torres ESPN. It
lets you right. Click on
a folder and checkout and
right click and do all
of your source control management
system either inside of Explorer.
And there seems to be
basically three kinds of people.
There's command line people there's
inside visual studio people, and
then there's Explorer people. And
whenever I hear someone talk
about kit or mercurial on
a windows side, I hear
them say, no, I'll wait
for the really awesome tortoise
version of that, that thing.
I, I don't know if
I'd say they focus too
much on it, but I
do. I can't say that.
I'm not sure I get
it. I always thought of
people who prefer the tortoise
client. I always wondered are
these just refugees who found
something they can use because
there was no good visual
studio client. I mean, cause
I mean certainly in our,
in our business, it's all
about the visual studio client.
We don't have any command
line users. I don't know
maybe one. And it's all
about visual studio. And for
a long time, I know
that CVS and subversion and
tools like that didn't really
have great visual studio integration.
But then this thing popped
up that, you know, everyone
called tortoise and like I
just never quite figured out,
do people actually prefer the
tortoise client or is it
that they couldn't get visual
studio? So they settled for
this and then they fell
in love with it. I
don't know. I, I, you
know, you never know why
people pick one thing and
then once they pick that
thing, that's how they work.
Therefore that's, that's where they,
that's what they're going to
do. I know that I
I'm using mercurial now. And
as a long time as
a subversion user, I find
it more comfortable just because
tortoise HG, which is the
mercurial login for Explorer feels
in 80%, like what I'm
used to, but the, the
hardcore alpha type say, you
know, I should grow a
pair and I should learn
how to use the command
line and gets the way
to go. Well, those don't
necessarily have to be synonymous.
So using mercurial from the
command line is actually kind
of nice, but yeah, there's
always going to be somebody
telling you that you should
use what they like instead
of what you like. It's
the way technology works. W
what is a what's you,
you have an open source
project that you're working on.
You mentioned a little bit
before. What, what are you
doing in the distributed version
control space? We're a, we're
implementing Something we call veracity.
And as you said, it's
open source and the core
will stay open source. Although
we do plan on selling
some, some add ons that
are proprietary later, but, you
know, in a nutshell, we're,
we're looking down the road
and thinking that the DVCS
model is likely to be
the future of this industry.
So we're, you know, we're,
we're making a longterm play
here and saying, we're trying
to build something that has
some of the best benefits
of something like mercurial, but
is designed to be very
enterprise friendly, designed to be
a bit more, a bit
more adaptable to the kinds
of things that, that a
lot of paying customers are
gonna care a lot about.
You know, things like administration
features, ID integration, of course
is going to be, is
going to be a focus
for us. You know, the,
I think the current tools
have gained this huge, popular
following in the community, and
I think they deserve it.
But what we're hearing from,
from a lot of corporate
and enterprise customers, when they
try and switch to something
like mercurial or get they
stumble because they over things
like, you know, wait, let
me get this straight. There's
no logins. There's no, there's
no way to administer users.
You know, things like that.
So we're, we're, we're trying
to build something that the
follows in the footsteps of
some of these outstanding tools,
but also is looking towards
more corporate users later. That'd
be very interesting to hear
from people who are listening
when they respond in the
comments to see if you're,
you know, you're effectively saying
we're going to make an
enterprise friendly DVCS and there's
the implicit, the ones that
are out there really aren't
enterprise friendly or scalable to
the size that accompany has.
And I don't mean scalable,
just like in the, how
many people can use it,
but in the kinds of
things that you throw at
it, that it would be
more unusual versus the kind
of classic way that open
is developed. That sounds like
a pretty interesting business opportunity.
Well, we think it is,
it's ambitious for a company
our size, but we're excited
about it. And we're, we're
doing well so far. So
it's fun. It's a, it's
a fun ride. Very cool.
Well, thanks so much for
sitting down with me and
talking about distributed version control
systems, and hopefully folks will
go out there and start
downloading stuff. And apparently not
asking an expert, they're going
to go figure it out
themselves. In most cases I
dare say they will. Thank
you, Scott. Thank you. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes. We'll see you
again next week.